Lasel Chenmo: A Sang Offering to the Nāgas
by Karma Chakme

Homage to the master Padmasambhava!

If you wish to make a sang offering to the nāgas, gather the following:
First, the five precious substances:
Gold, silver, pearl, coral and lapis lazuli;
Then the five grains: barley, rice, wheat, bean and sesame;
The five nectars: honey, sugar, milk, curd and butter;
The five medicines: heart-leaved moonseed, blackberry (kaṇḍakāri), markata, cuttlebone and sweet
flag;
The five fragrances: white sandalwood, red sandalwood, nutmeg, camphor and saffron;
And the six excellent medicines: bamboo pith, saffron, clove, nutmeg, small cardamom, and greater
cardamom. Also burn wood from various non-poisonous trees.
Generate the self-visualisation, according to whichever practice you prefer, and then recite
the following:
kyé  dangpo sang jung gangné jung
Kye! When sang first arose from where did it arise?
sang jung dzamling ü né jung
It first arose in the centre of Jambudvīpa,
namkhé mik dang mak la chak
Formed in the haze and darkness of the sky.
sa la tsishing natsok trung
Various plants appeared upon the earth.
dé la omé gyatso jung
And an ocean of milk came into being,
dé la metok mangpo kyé
In which many flowers began to grow,
so kyé dütsi men charbeb
And showers of nourishing nectar-like medicine rained down.
dechen rik ngé shyalyé né
In the palace of the five families of great bliss,
lu yi gyalpo dzam lha sang
To Jambhala, king of nāgas, we offer.
né chok lu yi po drang né
In the supreme place, the nāga palace,
lugyal tsuk na rinchen sang
To the nāga king Ratnacūḍa, we offer.
dé la khorwé lu rik sang
To the types of nāga who surround him, we offer.
karpo lu yi dé tsok sang
To the hosts of white nāgas, we offer.
ngönpo lu yi dé tsok sang
To the hosts of blue nāgas, we offer.
mukpo lu yi dé tsok sang
To the hosts of dark nāgas, we offer.
serpo lu yi dé tsok sang
To the hosts of yellow nāgas, we offer.
jang khu lu yi dé tsok sang
To the hosts of green nāgas, we offer.
trawo lu yi dé tsok sang
To the hosts of multi-coloured nāgas, we offer.
marpo lu yi dé tsok sang
To the hosts of red nāgas, we offer.
nakpo lu yi dé tsok sang
To the hosts of black nāgas, we offer.
gyalrik karpo lu yi dé tsok sang
To the hosts of white nāgas from the royal caste, we offer.
jerik serpo lu yi dé tsok sang
To the hosts of yellow nāgas from the merchant caste, we offer.
dramzé nakpo lu yi dé tsok sang
To the hosts of black nāgas from the priestly caste, we offer.
mang rik jang khu lu yi dé tsok sang
To the hosts of green nāgas from the commoners' caste, we offer.
dolpa nakpo lu yi dé tsok sang
To the hosts of black nāgas from the untouchables' caste, we offer.
gyalchen shyipo khor ché sang
We offer to the four great kings and their retinue.
luchen gyepo khor ché sang
We offer to the eight great nāgas and their retinue.
za dang gyukar tsok nam sang
We offer to the planets and the constellations.
lumo ta shyin nor shyin sang
We offer to the female nāgas: as horses and as riches.
lumo luk shyin yang shyin sang
We offer to the female nāgas: as sheep and as wealth.
lumo zé shyin ter shyin sang
We offer to the female nāgas: as food and as treasure.
pa ri yé la nepé lha lu sang
We offer to the gods and nāgas who live there in the mountains to the right.
tsur ri yön la nepé ö lha lu sang
We offer to the gods and nāgas who live here in the mountains to the left.
babpa chu la nepé lha lu sang
We offer to the gods and nāgas who live in streaming water.
sawa drak la nepé lha lu sang
We offer to the gods and nāgas who live in solid rock.
yowa lung la nepé lha lu sang
We offer to the gods and nāgas who live in flowing air.
tenpa khar la nepé lha lu sang
We offer to the gods and nāgas who live in stable space.
riwo kün lé nepé lha lu sang
We offer to the gods and nāgas who live in the mountains.
gyatso kün lé nepé lha lu sang
We offer to the gods and nāgas who live in the oceans.
yul chok kün la nepé lha lu sang
We offer to the gods and nāgas  who live in supreme lands.
chumik kün la nepé lha lu sang
We offer to the gods and nāgas who live in springs.
khyé lu nam sangpé yönten gyi
O nāgas, as a result of these purifying offerings to you,
mi yi né yam chö gyur chik
May all contagious diseases among human beings cease!
nor gyi gö yam chö gyur chik
May all financial loss and ruin come to an end!
ta yi ta si chö gyur chik
May the si demons who plague horses be eliminated!
luk gi né yam chö gyur chik
And may diseases among sheep be brought to an end!
so jé dütsi men gyi sang
We offer nourishing nectar-like medicine.
nawa yö na dering sang
If there is disease, today let it be purified.
mewa yön na dering sang
If there is impurity, today let it be purified.
yowa yö na dering sang
If there is instability, today let it be purified.
nolwa yö na dering sang
If there is contamination, today let it be purified.
torwa yö na dering sang
If there is dispersal, today let it be purified.
do kam sang na ser du gyur
This purifying sang turns dry stone into gold.
shing kam sang na yalga trung
This purifying sang causes dead trees to sprout new branches.
lu nam sumgya drukchu sang
To the 360 nāgas, we offer.
lu pen nyitri chiktong sang
To the 21,000 beneficial nāgas, we offer.
döyön terkhé lu nam sang
To the nāgas who guard the treasury of all that is desirable, we offer.
chuk nam pelwé lu nam sang
To the nāgas who increase livestock, we offer.
yang nam pelwé lu nam sang
To the nāgas who increase prosperity, we offer.
mi nam pelwé lu nam sang
To the nāgas who cause human beings to multiply, we offer.
nor nam pelwé lu nam sang
To the nāgas who increase wealth, we offer.
luk nam pelwé lu nam sang
To the nāgas who increase stocks of sheep, we offer.
ta nam pelwé lu nam sang
To the nāgas who increase stocks of horses, we offer.
tenpa nyenpo gyündu sung
Guard continuously the powerful teachings,
tsering sok kyong lu yi dzö
Nāgas who sustain longevity and protect the life-force,
khajé wangtang lu yi sung
Nāga guardians of fortune and authentic presence (wang-tang),
lu yi terkha sumgya drukchu sang
To the 360 treasuries of the nāgas, we offer.
lu yi chammo tenma chunyi sang
To the twelve tenma, sisters of the nāgas, we offer.
dak gi mi nor pel shying sung kyob dzö
Increase and protect our progeny and wealth!
naga siddhi tim du
muber ratna soha
lé dar ratna soha
yang ber ratna soha
This great sang offering to the nāgas, known as Lasel Chenmo (The Great Spirit Clearing), was
composed by the master Padmasambhava.

shuddhé sang shuddhé shuddhé soha
kyé, gawo nyer ga jokpo dang
Kye! Nanda, Upananda, Takṣaka
dü kyong dzinpa lak mang tsok
Śaṅkhapāla, Many-Limbed Grasper and the rest—
luchen gyé dang rik shyi lu
The eight great nāga kings and nāgas of the four castes:
khor ché tokmé dir shek la
Come now, instantly, together with your retinues!
duk na madré men né tsok
We offer various medicines untainted by poison,
rab jar dütsi rilbu dang
Well-made pills of amṛta nectar,
sang chö gyachen di bul lo
And vast gifts of purifying incense smoke!
gyepa chenpö shyé né kyang
Please accept them with great delight,
khön tsawa duk tsub ngenpa kün
And, having pacified all resentment and poisons of the mind,
shyi né changchub semkyé do
Generate bodhicitta, the mind of awakening.
tsa sé tünpa matongwar
Do not permit blight, untimely frost, or drought.
mi chukné rim shyiwa dang
Pacify diseases that threaten people and livestock.
charchu dü su bebpa dang
Let the rains fall on time.
lo chuk taktu lekpa sok
Cause harvests and herds to be forever bountiful and well,
chö jor dekyi pelwar dzö
And make Dharma, wealth and happiness thrive!
semchen nepa jinyé pa
May all those beings who are sick
nyurdu né lé tar gyur chik
Be swiftly freed from sickness!
drowé né nam malüpa
May all diseases that affect living beings
taktu jungwa mepar shok
Never return!
lugyal gawo nyer ga dang
May the nāga kings Nanda and Upananda
ten la depé lha nam dang
And all the devas who have faith in the teachings,
gyalpo jindak nyi dang ni
As well as kings and patrons,
semchen pongpa jinyé pa
And all who are in poverty,
tsering nemé pün sum tsok
Live long, in good health and prosperity,
tendu dewa tobpar shok
And may they gain lasting happiness!
This was written by Paṇchen Yeshe Chökyi Gyaltsen. Thus it was said by Kongtse, King of Power.

lama gönpo chenrezik la chak tsal lo
Homage to the guru, Lord Avalokiteśvara!
With any preliminaries, such as the preparation of nāga medicine, out of the way, continue with
refuge and bodhicitta:
sangye chö dang tsok kyi chok nam la
In the Buddha, the Dharma and the Supreme Assembly
changchub bardu dak ni kyab su chi
I take refuge until I attain enlightenment.
dak gi jin sok gyipé sönam kyi
Through the merit of practising generosity and so on,
dro la pen chir sangye drubpar shok
May I attain buddhahood for the benefit of all beings.
And recite the verses of the four immeasurables three times.
rang nyi ké chik gi chenré zik su salwé  d¨n du pema karpo dabma sum khebpé ü su tso dang dzingbu
dang jön shing ne'u sing chu mik sok lü podrang nyamgé tewar nyi da dang hrih yik lé
jowo khsarpani ku dok karpo shyal chik chak nyi yé chok jin dang  yön tukkar pema nampa
rinpoché gyen dumé dzepa yé kyang yön kum gyi tsul du shyukpé né sum la om ah hung sum gyi
tsenpa tukké cha mé du yi gé hrih yik dang chépar gyur
In an instant I appear clearly as Avalokiteśvara. Before me, in the centre of a delightful nāga
palace surrounded by lakes covered with three-petalled white lotuses, and by lovely pools,
trees, meadows and springs, are discs of sun and moon and a syllable HRĪḤ, from which
Lord Khasarpāṇi appears. He is white in colour, with one face and two hands. His right hand
is in the gesture of supreme generosity and his left holds a lotus at his heart. He is
adorned with precious ornaments, and sits with his right leg extended and left leg drawn in.
At his three centres are the three syllables OṂ, ĀḤ and HŪṂ. At the lower portion of his
heart is a syllable HRĪḤ.
pakpé ta kor du nor gyé dung kyong  gawo nyegawo pema chulha pal gyi'o öpoché rikzang tobden
té lu chen po gyé tö kyebü cha ché la drul go dün gyi deng ka chen  mé drul juk tu khyilwa
khor lu dang sa dak du mé yong su gangwar gyur
Surrounding noble Avalokiteśvara are Vāsuki, Śaṅkhapāla, Nanda, Upananda, Padma, Varuṇa, the
Glorious, the Radiant, Kulika, and Balavat—the eight great nāga kings. Their upper bodies
are dressed in human clothes, they each have seven hooded serpent heads, and their lower
bodies are twisting serpent tails. They are completely surrounded by nāgas and earth lords.
tukké sabön lé özer gyi lü rik su gyurpa tamché chen drang
From the seed-syllable at your heart, rays of light stream out to invite every type and caste
of nāga.
om nāga sapariwāra samaya dza dza
Recite the mantra seven times as an invitation.
dün kyé la timpar gyur
They dissolve into the front visualization.
Bless as nectar with OṂ, ĀḤ and HŪṂ.1
pakpé chak til gyi hrih yik lé gang dö kyi düdtsi gyün bab lu dang sa dak tamché kyi tung shying
trü chépé lü ngak yi sum gyi nyer tsé tamché dak né gawa dang güpa khyepar chen kyewar
gyur par gyur
From the syllable HRĪḤ in the Noble One's hands flows a stream of nectar containing all that
is desirable. All the nāgas and earth-lords drink from it and are cleansed. All their harmful
deeds of body, speech and mind are purified and they feel a special joy and reverence.
oṃ bā su ké maṃ svāhā
Recite this one hundred times as you count the water.
If you are reciting the Nāga Sang Offering, do so here. Then:
namo
chö nam tamché gyu lé jung
All dharmas originate from causes.
dé gyu dé shyin shekpé sung
The Tathāgata has taught these causes,
gyu la gokpa gang yin pa
And also that which puts a stop to these causes—
gejong chenpö di ké sung
This too has been taught by the Great Śramaṇa.

dikpa chi yang mi ja shying
Commit not a single unwholesome action,
gewa punsum tsokpar ché
Cultivate a wealth of virtue,
rang gi sem ni yong su dül
Tame completely this mind of ours—
di ni sangye tenpa yin
This is the teaching of the buddhas.
Give the gift of the Dharma like this, and recite the dhāraṇī of purifying the lower realms.
om bipula garbhé mani trabhé tathagata dhari shani mani mani sutrabhé bimalé sagara gambhiré
hung hung dzola dzola buddha bilokité, guhya adhikté garbhé soha | pema dhara amogha dzayadé
tsuru tsuru soha ||
oṃ vipula-garbhe maṇi-prabhe tathāgata-nidarśane maṇi maṇi suprabhe vimale sāgara gambhīre hūṃ
hūṃ jvala jvala buddhāvilokite guhyādhiṣṭite garbhe svāhā |2 padmadhara amogha jayate curu
curu svāhā ||
Recite OṂ AKĀRO...etc. in order to bless the torma with amṛta nectar in the general way. Then
continue with:
kyön gyi ma gö ku dok kar
Unspoilt by defects, your body is white,
dzok sangye kyi u la gyen
Your crown is adorned with the perfect buddha,
tukjé chen gyi dro la zik
And with eyes of compassion you gaze on all beings—
chenré zik la chak tsal lo
Avalokiteśvara, to you we offer homage!
om mani padme hung
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ
lu chen gyé dang lu rik shyi
Eight great nāga kings, nāgas of the four castes,
lu tren sam gyi mi khyab nam
And all you minor nāgas, inconceivable in number:
chö jin torma di shyé la
Accept this offering of torma.
nyé shing tsimpar dzé gyur chik
May it delight and satisfy you!
tongwé duk dang rekpé duk
Poisonous glimpses, poisonous contact,
kha lang duk dang tsewé duk
Poisonous breath, poisonous injury,
sam ngen duk la sokpa yi
Poisonous malice and such like—
lu yi duk nam shyiwar dzö
Pacify all these poisons of the nāgas!
dak chak lhak sam denpa dang
Through the truth of our own positive intentions
chö jin di tar ngöpé tü
And the power of dedicating our offerings,
lu yi nyer tsé shyi gyur chik
May all harm from the nāgas be pacified!
lu men dza ti pala yi
Through the nāga medicine jātiphala (nutmeg),
lu yi go né sö gyur chik
May the head sickness of the nāgas be healed!
zi dang gyatsö buwa yi
Through onyx and cuttlebone,
mik dang lé nyam sö gyur chik
May visual impairment and malady of the brain be healed!
utpel la dang nya chib kyi
Through utpala flower and mother of pearl,
na dang drampa nyampa sö
May ailments of the nose and the jaw be healed!
litri tsel gyi sha trak dang
Through sindoor3 and vermillion, the flesh and blood;
dar dang drön bü jak dang so
Through silk and cowries, the tongue and teeth;
dung dang gur gum rü nyam dang
And through conch and saffron, may weakness in the bones
dri sung nyampa sö gyur chik
And deterioration of odours be remedied!
tsenden karpö tsé né dang
May white sandalwood cure fever,
mabjé dong kyi dang nyam sö
And peacock feather restore dullness of complexion!
za wo dar zab nying shyo shé
May silk brocade and the heart zhosha,
pak dang nying nyam sö gyur chik
Heal problems with the skin and heart!
khelma shyo shé khelma dang
May the kidney zhosha heal the kidneys
lagor shyo shé lowa sö
And the lagor zhosha heal the lungs!
chu sin dermo wang lak gi
May makara-claw and markata
dermo yenlak nyampa sö
Heal any impairments of the nails and limbs!
chak tsang kuwé dröpa dang
May calabash heal stomach ailments
pang pö tsultrim nyampa sö
And spikenard heal impairments of discipline!
pu shel tsé dang do gyü kyi
May dendrobium nobile and asbestos
tsa gyü chu gyü nyampa sö
Heal disorders of the ligaments and sinews!
lé tré chi tang kara yi
May heart-leaved moonseed and false black pepper
gyuma rekcha nyampa sö
Heal intestinal problems!
a ru ra yi nang tröl dang
May chebulic myrobalan heal the internal organs,
dambu karé men chok gi
And the supreme medicine of mare's-tail
né khang nyampa sö gyur chik
Heal degenerations of the dwelling place!
rin chen na ngé bangdzö dang
May the five precious substances restore the treasury,
kar sum ngar sum kha zé kyi
And the three whites and three sweets
za cha nyampa sö gyur chik
Replenish stores of food and drink!
jikten kham ni tamché du
Throughout all the lands of this world,
charchu dü su bebpa dang
May the rains forever fall on time,
lo chuk taktu lekpar dzö
And harvests and herds be forever bountiful and well.
khyepar né dir dö mi dang
In particular, for all those who reside in this place,
naljor dak dang jindak la
And for us practitioners and our patrons,
lung tri beken d¨pa sok
May all nāga diseases, such as imbalances
lu yi né rik shyiwar dzö
Of wind, bile and phlegm, be pacified!
mugé truk tsö shyiwa dang
May famine and conflict be overcome!
shyi gyé la sok ngödrup tsöl
Grant us the attainments of pacifying, enriching and the rest!
gyen gyi gyenpar ché né chö ché dé
Adorned with the finest ornaments, and practising the Dharma,
dul shying yangdak dom la tsangpar chö
Peaceful, perfectly restrained, and chaste in conduct—
gelong gejong dé yin dramzé'ang dé
This is what it means to be a monk or nun, an ascetic or a brahmin.
tsönché mi jik gang yang mé
There are none who do not fear weapons,
chiwé sok la kun kyang dzem
For everyone avoids whatever threatens life.
rang gi lü la pé long la
Take the example of your own body,
shyen la nöpa ma ché chik
And do no harm to others!
When accumulating, repeat the section from the front visualization until here. If your visualization
is stable it is acceptable to accumulate from the blessing with nectar onwards.4
Then there is the request to depart:
om naga sapariwara samaya hung dza dza
naga shik shik
khyer chik
deng shik
naga shik
naga trol
naga deng
lu gyal rik  dramzé rik jé rik mang rik dölpa la sokpa tamché chok tsam rang rang gi né su ké
chik gi shekpar gyur
All you nāgas of the royal caste, priestly caste, merchant caste, commoners' caste and untouchables,
depart this very instant and return to your own place in whichever direction it may
be!
badzra mu

Recite the section:
chöjin né dir gang lhakpé
May all the spirits gathered here
jungpo sa wok gyuwa dang
In this place of offering—those who travel beneath the earth,
gang yang sa teng khöpa dang
Those who dwell upon the earth,
sa lar gyuwa gang yinpa
And those who move about above it—
guwar gyi la rang né su
All be satisfied and return,
tamché tadé drowar gyi
Each to their own separate abode!
sarwa bhuta gatsa
rang gi lü la pé long la
Take the example of your own body,
shyen la nöpa ma ché chik
And do no harm to others!
Consider that all return to their own places of residence.
Through the power of our efforts, positive intention and virtue, may all forms of nāga reach
awakening!
The nāga king Vāsuki offered this to the great, glorious goddess. May virtue abound!

Brief Confession to the Earth Lords
kyé, dak dang gyujor yöndak gi
Kye! For all of us practitioners and patrons,
gar dro gar duk nepé tsok
No matter where we may go or reside,
yul chok di la ten népé
All that we do towards you inhabitants of these places,
lha lu nyen sum khyé nam la
All you devas, nāgas and nyen spirits,
pama ngarab depa dang
Including the actions of our ancestors in the past,
butsa chirab yenché kyi
And of our descendants in future generations—
sa nyen kö dang do nyen lang
Any transgressions, such as digging the spirits of the earth, raising the spirits of stone,
chu nyen truk dang shing nyen ché
Stirring the spirits of water, cutting the spirits of trees,
ro bak tab shyob zor lam sok
Improper handling of corpses, polluting the home, sorcery, and the like—
marik ma shé chi galwa
Whatever we have done (or will do) in our ignorance,
tollo shak so dak gyur chik
We hereby declare and confess: may it all be purified!
om akani nikani abhila mandhala mandale mayé soha
This brief confession to the earth lords is by Rāga Asya.

If you wish to practise a brief sang offering from time to time, recite the following:
hung, rigdzin orgyen pema jungné dang
Hūṃ! To Padmasambhava, the vidyādhara of Oḍḍiyāna,
khandrö tso mo lha cham mandara
Foremost of ḍākinīs, Princess Mandāravā,
yeshe tsogyel nub ben lotsawa
Yeshe Tsogyal, Nubchen, monks and translators,
tsa sum ling dang rigdzin mi jik dor
Tsasum Lingpa, the vidyādhara Mijik Dorje,
tsa gyü lamé tsok ché tamché la
And all the root and lineage masters,
dam dzé düdtsi sangchö di pulwé
We offer this sang of samaya substances and nectar.
dak sok chang chub tobpé trinlé dzö
Carry out your enlightened activity and bring us and others to awakening!

by Tsasum Lingpa.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2017, at the request of, and with the kind assistance of, Dza
Kilung Rinpoche. With many thanks to the Kilung Foundation. Revised and updated 2019, with
the kind assistance of Tulku Rigdzin Pema, Han Kop and Stefan Mang.
↑ The three syllables OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ are repeated three times.↑ This part of the dhāraṇī comes from
The Incantation of the Sovereign Practice of the Supreme Secret Found Especially in the
Great Jewel Palace (Tōh. 506, mahāmaṇivipula­vimānasupratiṣṭhitaguhya­paramarahasyakalparāja­dhāraṇī,
nor chen rgyas pa'i gzhal med khang shin tu rab tu gnas pa gsang ba dam pa'i
gsang ba'i cho ga zhib mo'i rgyal po'i gzungs)↑ Skt. Sindūra↑ i.e., from OṂ AKĀRO onwards.