Mountain Smoke Offering
from the Life-Force Practice of the Vidyādharas (Rigdzin Sokdrup)
revealed by Lhatsün Namkha Jikmé

droom rinchen natsok dangmé nö yang su
Bhrūṃ! In the vast lustrous vessel, made of the essence of various jewels,
jikten sipé dögu damtsik dzé
The samaya substances, all the desirable objects in worldly existence, are
dru sum yeshe dütsir jinlabpé
Transformed into the nectar of wisdom through the blessing of the three seed syllables oṃ āḥ
hūṃ,
nangsi chöpé dögur trikpa di
So that all that appears and exists becomes an offering of all that is desirable.
lama yidam daki chösung dang
This I offer to the gurus, yidams, ḍākinīs, dharmapālas and
chok chu gyalwé kyilkhor jinyé dang
All the mandalas of the buddhas of the ten directions,
dzamling shyidak rik druk lenchak drön
To the local deities of this world, beings of the six realms and the guests to whom I owe karmic
debts.
khyepar dak gi tsé trok sok ku shying
And especially to those who would steal my life and deplete my life force,
né tong barché tsompé jungpo dang
To the malicious jungpo demons who inflict sickness and obstacles,
milam tak tsen ngen dang té ngen rik
Bad signs in dreams and all types of evil omens,
dé gyé marung chotrul dakpo dang
The eight classes of negative spirits, the masters of magical illusions,
zé dang né dang nor gyi lenchak chen
And those to whom I owe karmic debts of food, place and wealth,
drib dak nyodré poshin moshin dang
To forces that bring obscuration and madness, to the shades of men and women dead.
driwo terang drong sin dremo ché
To all the spirits, térangs, ghouls and female ghosts!
lenchak marpö mé la jal té sek
Now all my karmic debts are paid, burnt in the scarlet flames.
rang rang yi la gang dö dögü char
Whatever each one desires, may the objects of their desires rain down:
jisi namkha né kyi bar nyi du
For as far and as long as space exists
döpé yönten zepa mepar ngo
I dedicate an inexhaustible amount of sensual stimulants!
dak gi dü sum sakpé dikdrib dang
May my negative actions and obscurations accumulated in past, present and future,
könchok dé shinkor la chepa nam
And misuse of the offerings made to the Three Jewels, in devotion and for the dead,
jinsek mechö di yi dak gyur chik
Be purified in the fire of this sang offering!
meché nangsi gangwé dultren ré
Let its flames fill the entire universe and every minute particle of flame
kunzang chöpé trinpung mizepa
Become an inexhaustible cloud of offerings like Samantabhadra’s
gyalwé shyingkham yong la khyab gyur chik
Pervading throughout all the buddha realms!
meché yeshe ö ngé chöjin zer
May these flames, offering-rays of five-coloured lights of wisdom,
rik druk narmé né su khyab gyurpé
Pervade throughout the six classes of beings, down to the Avīci Hells,
kham sum khorwa jalü ökur drol
The three realms of saṃsāra be liberated into the rainbow body,
dro kün changchub nyingpor sangye shok
And all sentient beings awaken into the heart of enlightenment!
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
With this, make the offering a hundred, thousand, or several hundred thousand times.
ku sum dakpa nö kyi shyalyé su
All is purified into the three kāyas: the environment, a heavenly palace where
chö long trul sum nangsi zukpung nam
Dharmakāya, saṃbhogakāya and nirmāṇakāya—appearance and the form aggregates of existence
dütsir shyuwé ja'ö barnang gang
Melt into nectar, flooding the whole expanse of the sky with rainbow light.
khorwa nyangdé zakmé dütsi chü
Saṃsāra is liberated into nirvāṇa; this essence of immaculate nectar,
tokmé dü né danta yenché du
I share with all those who, from beginningless time until now,
nangsi drön du gyurpa yong la ngo
Have been guests in worldly existence.
salam drebü yönten tarchin shying
Having attained all the noble qualities of the stages, paths and fruition,
ta gom chö pé barché kün sal né
And dispelled all obstacles in view, meditation and action,
mejung kunzang tuk kyi khaying su
Within the sky-like space of Samantabhadra’s wondrous wisdom mind,
shyönnu bumkur tensi zinpar shok
May we seize the stronghold of the youthful vase body!
khorwé gyatso chenpo tongpé tar
And when at last the great ocean of saṃsāra is emptied;
womin pema drawar sangye shok
May all beings attain buddhahood in the Lotus Net of Akaniṣṭha!
pung kham sekdzé trakdang ziji bar
The sang offerings of the aggregates and elements blaze in vivid, brilliant splendour!
kar mar changsem sekdzé detong bar
The sang offerings of red and white bodhicitta blaze in bliss and emptiness!
tongnyi nyingjé sekdzé chöying gang
The sang offerings of emptiness and compassion fill the dharmadhātu!
nangsi khordé dorjé ö ngé shyir
Upon the ground of five-coloured vajra light of phenomenal existence, saṃsāra and nirvāṇa,
lhündrub dzok sangye pé sekdzé bul
I offer the smoke offering of spontaneously accomplished perfect buddhahood.
ngön gyi lenchak tamché jang gyur chik
May all my karmic debts from the past be purified!
danta gyü la miné tol lo shak
In the present so they do not remain in my mind-stream, I confess them!
ma ong dribpé khorlor magyur chik
In the future, may I never be drawn into the wheel of obscuration!
sotar changsem rigpa dzinpa yi
All impairments of the vows of individual liberation, bodhisattva precepts,
dom ché labpa sang ngak damtsik rik
And samayas of the vidyādharas,
tsor dang matsor nyampa tol lo shak
Conscious or unwitting, I openly admit.
né dön drib dang mitsang dak gyur chik
May illness, harmful influence, obscurations and impurities be purified!
né muk tsön gyi kalpa shyi gyur chik
May this age of plague, famine and warfare be pacified!
tami ü su ongwé sünma dok
May the attacks of invaders be repelled!
chödzé lama dendren barché dok
May the forces that create obstacles by inviting the spiritual teacher to leave this world be
averted!
böyul trami shipé te ngen dok
May inauspicious bad omens for the land of Tibet be averted!
za lu gyalpö sokuk düpa dok
May the planetary forces, nāgas and arrogant king-like spirits, who cut short the breath of
life, be repelled!
jikpa chenpo gyé dang chudruk dok
May the eight great fears and sixteen lesser fears be overcome!
dakchak khor ché trami shipa dok
For me and all those around me, may all that is inauspicious be averted!1
damsi gongpö tutob nüpa dok
May the powers and strength of samaya-breakers and gongpo demons be averted!
samaya

As indicated in the ritual for the fire offering, use 108 incense burners and various kinds
of wood. Through this diamond-like practice of Mountain Smoke Offering, one will be able to
‘ransom’ death, purify the misuse of offerings and avert various kinds of obstacle. In accordance
with the ḍākinī’s instructions, this was set down, without any error, when revealing
the hidden land of Sikkim.

| Rigpa Translations, 2008. Corrected, 2016.

Source: “Ri bo bsangs mchod” in Rig 'dzin srog sgrub, 5 vols, Delhi: Chos spyod dpar skrun khang,
2000, (TBRC W13779) Vol. 1: 829–834
↑ An alternative version of this line reads: bdag cag gar gnas bkra mi shis pa zlog. (Wherever
I reside, may all that is inauspicious be averted!)