The Lotus Net
A Sang Offering to the Mighty Lotus Ḍākinī, Kurukullā
by Mipham Rinpoche

Burn pure substances such as fragrant wood, dried dairy produce,1 assorted medicinal herbs and
various kinds of grain in a fire, sprinkle them with water, and recite:
ram yam kham, tongpé ngang lé lhadzé sang gi dü trin zakmé dewa chenpo döyön nampa tamché par
charwé kuntuzangpö chöpé trin chenpö namkhé kham gangwar gyur
Raṃ yaṃ khaṃ. From the state of emptiness arise clouds of divine smoke offerings—undefiled great
bliss in the form of sensory delights—which fill the whole sky, like the great offering-clouds
of Samantabhadra.
Bless the offering substances by saying three times:
om ah hung ho
oṃ āḥ hūṃ hoḥ
hrih, rangshyin ösal dakpé ying nyi lé
Hrīḥ. From the all-pervading space of pure, natural luminosity
dechen rang dang yitrok lhamö zuk
Arises the natural radiance of great bliss in the form of the captivating goddess.
tabshé utpal dashyü chakgya chen
Whose insignia, the lotus bow and arrow, represent skilful means and wisdom—
rikjé wang gi taki dir shek shik
Kurukullā, ḍākinī of magnetizing, come now to this place!
sa sum tenpa trokpé yi ong ku
Your beautiful and attractive form captivates the three realms
duldral depé langtso ngön bar shying
And blazes with a youthfulness that brings immaculate bliss.
sishyi dang chü wangmé düpa yi
Together with magnetizing ḍākinīs in their thousands and millions,
wang dzé khandro jewa bum dangché
You irresistibly gather the pure essences of existence and peace.
nangtong kü’i gartab lam sé lam
With your bodies of appearance and emptiness dancing and swaying
gyé shyé sung gi drayang drok shyindu
And your melodious speech of delight resounding and cheering,
chöpé drön du gyepar dir shek la
Come now as a guest joyfully to receive these offerings.
jéchak tuk kyi gong shing tsewar dzö
Consider us and care for us with your minds of loving passion.
The Offerings
tsang jar sang gi dü trin yi ongwa
Delightful billows of pure and fragrant incense smoke
rabkar chudzin shyönnü pungpo tar
Amass like rain-bearing clouds of pristine whiteness,
lha lam rabtu khyabpé zer ma lé
Yielding their droplets that fill the heavenly pathway of the sky,
döyön gyatsö rolpa zémishé
And shower down an inexhaustible ocean of sensory delights—
gyalsi na dün tashi dzé tak gyé
The seven emblems of royalty, eight auspicious substances and symbols,
bum zang paksam shing dang norbü ter
Excellent vases, wish-granting trees and treasuries of jewels,
lha yi kyetsal dütsi chuwo sok
Heavenly pleasure groves and rivers of flowing nectar—
lhami jorpa matsang mepa dang
All the wealth of gods and human beings with nothing lacking,
rabjam chok chü shying na gang chipé
All that there is throughout the infinite realms of the ten directions,
zuk dzé dra nyen drishyim ro dalwa
Vast clouds of sensory delights—beautiful sights, sweet sounds,
rek jam demchok döyön drukden trin
Fragrant scents, delicious tastes, pleasant textures and perfect bliss—
dzemé namkha dzö kyi khorlor dü
All gathered as the inexhaustible sphere that is the treasury of space.

nangsi wang gi chakgyar sepa lé
Arising as the mudrā that magnetizes appearance and existence,
jé chak gawé terden shyönnü tsok
Hosts of youthful ones possessing the treasury of passionate joy,
tabshé detong rolpé dögar gyi
Perform their dance of means and wisdom, bliss and emptiness,
zakmé dewa pelwé chöpa bul
Which intensifies the rapture that is undefiled—all this, I offer.

tamché nyamnyi ösal dakpé ying
In the pure space of luminosity wherein everything is equal,
döné dewa chenpö ngang nyi du
An experience that is, and always has been, the highest bliss,
dak dang lha dang chö kün yermépé
There’s no distinction between self, deity and all phenomena—
rangjung chöpa chok gi nyé gyur chik
May this supreme, naturally arisen offering delight you!

gyal kün trinlé rikjé wangmo yi
Powerful Kurukullā, embodiment of all the victors’ activity,
shyabpé tsuk gi tenpé naljor dak
Rest your lotus-like feet upon this practitioner’s crown.
changchub bardu dralmé jezung né
Care for me, inseparably, from now until awakening,
nam nyi ngödrub dögü druchar pob
And shower down twofold accomplishment and all that is desired.

tabshé utpal dashyü si sum gyi
With your lotus bow and arrow of skilful means and wisdom
yi nang tenpa wangmé trok dzé dé
Captivate irresistibly the three planes of existence,
mi dang mi min kyegü tsok chenpo
And turn these multitudes of beings, human and non-human alike,
naljor tünpé dren du nangwar dzö
Into servants, suited and responsive to a practitioner’s needs.

madak lungsem yowé chotrul kün
Let all the illusory manifestations of impure wind-energy and mind
detong dhuti ying su wangjé né
Be brought within the avadhūti’s space2 of bliss and emptiness,
pomé dewa lhenkyé takini
And help us, we pray, to perfect within this very lifetime
gopang tsé dir drubpar dzé du sol
The state of the innate ḍākinī of immutable ecstasy!

pal dang jorpa nyen dang drakpa dang
Carry out your enlightened activity, we pray,
tu dang nüpa dé dang kyipé pal
So that our splendour, wealth, reputation and renown,
yarngö da dang yar gyi chuwo tar
Power, influence, wellbeing and happiness may expand and increase
pelgyé tenpé trinlé dzé du sol
Like the waxing moon or a river in spate, and remain forever stable!

dorna yi la gang dö pal tob ching
In short, help us to obtain whatever splendours we desire
choktün ngödrub gyatsö wang gi chuk
And gain an ocean of accomplishments, ordinary and supreme.
ten dang dro la penpé tu denpé
Cause us to acquire the power to benefit the teachings and beings
rangshyen dön nyi drubpar dzé du sol
And to accomplish our own and others’ aims, we pray!

This was written by Mipham at the request of Atsang, a virtuous upholder of the science of medicine,
in the hermitage of Thrangü, during the month of Kṛttikā3 on the third day of Victory4
of the waning moon. May virtue and excellence abound!

| Translated by Han Kop and Adam Pearcey, 2021, with the kind assistance of Tulku Dawa.

Source: Mi pham rgya mtsho. "pad+ma mkha' 'gro'i rigs byed rtsal gyi bsang mchod padma'i dra
ba" in gsung 'bum/_mi pham rgya mtsho. TBRC W23468. 27 vols. Paro, Bhutan: Lama Ngodrup and
Sherab Drimey, 1984–1993. http://tbrc.org/link?RID=W23468 Vol. 6: 777–780
↑ This could also refer to the dried wood of a plant with milky sap. (Tulku Dawa)↑ i.e., the
central channel↑ Tulku Dawa says that here this refers to the tenth month.↑ That is, the
28th day of the lunar month.