Mountain Smoke Offering
from Accomplishing the Life Force of the Vidyādharas
revealed by Lhatsün Namkha Jikmé

om ah hung
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ!
kha nyam sishyi kyab kün nyingpö chü
The heart essence of all the sources of refuge of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, who are as vast as space,
wang drak rigdzin pema tötreng tsal
Powerful and wrathful vidyādhara, Padma Tötreng Tsal;
khyé kur nangsi gyalwé kyilkhor dzok
Within your body, all that appears and exists is the perfect buddha mandala:
dro kün si lé dral chir kyab su chi
In order to liberate all beings from saṃsāra, I take refuge in you!

sang chok yeshe ösal tiklé shyir
In the ground of the luminous tiklé of supremely secret wisdom,
dro kün drib sum dak né ku dang sung
May the three obscurations of all beings be purified, and
tuk kyi tikler lhündrub nang shyi ngang
With the four visions spontaneously perfected in the tiklé of the wisdom body, speech and mind,
shyönnu bumkur drolwar semkyé do
May all beings be liberated into the youthful vase body! For this, I generate the heart and
mind of bodhicitta.

shi rik machö nyukmar chaktsal shying
To the primordial, unaltered nature of rigpa, I pay homage! And
ting ta dralwé ösal chöpa bul
The luminosity, transcending limits and dimensions, I offer!
khorwa nyangdé nyamnyi long du shak
In the expanse of the sameness of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, I confess!
lodral chö zé chenpor jé yi rang
In the great exhaustion of all dharmas, beyond the ordinary mind, I rejoice!
lhündrub dzogpachenpö chökhor kor
Turn the wheel of the teachings of the spontaneously perfect Dzogpachenpo!
khorwa dong né trukpar solwa deb
Stir the depths of saṃsāra, I pray!
khor sum mik tadralwé pata ngo
In the absolute state, free of subject, object or activity, I dedicate!
Then, for the mountain smoke  offering:
droom rinchen natsok dangmé nö yang su
Bhrūṃ! In the vast lustrous vessel, made of the essence of various jewels,
jikten sipé dögu damtsik dzé
The samaya substances, all the desirable objects in worldly existence, are
dru sum yeshe dütsir jinlabpé
Transformed into the nectar of wisdom through the blessing of the three seed syllables oṃ āḥ
hūṃ,
nangsi chöpé dögur trikpa di
So that all that appears and exists becomes an offering of all that is desirable.
lama yidam daki chösung dang
This I offer to the lamas, yidams, ḍākinīs, dharmapālas and
chok chu gyalwé kyilkhor jinyé dang
All the mandalas of the buddhas of the ten directions,
dzamling shyidak rik druk lenchak drön
To the local deities of this world, beings of the six realms and the guests to whom I owe karmic
debts.
khyepar dak gi tsé trok sok ku shying
And especially to those who would steal my life and deplete my life force,
né tong barché tsompé jungpo dang
To the malicious jungpo demons who inflict sickness and obstacles,
milam tak tsen ngen dang té ngen rik
Bad signs in dreams and all types of evil omens,
dé gyé marung chotrul dakpo dang
The eight classes of negative spirits, the masters of magical illusions,
zé dang né dang nor gyi lenchak chen
And those to whom I owe karmic debts of food, place and wealth,
drib dak nyodré poshin moshin dang
To forces that bring obscuration and madness, to the shades of men and women dead.
driwo terang drong sin dremo ché
To all the spirits, térangs, ghouls and female ghosts!
lenchak marpö mé la jal té sek
Now all my karmic debts are paid, burnt in the scarlet flames.
rang rang yi la gang dö dögü char
Whatever each one desires, may the objects of their desires rain down:
jisi namkha né kyi bar nyi du
For as far and as long as space exists
döpé yönten zepa mepar ngo
I dedicate an inexhaustible amount of sensual stimulants!
dak gi dü sum sakpé dikdrib dang
May my negative actions and obscurations accumulated in past, present and future,
könchok dé shinkor la chepa nam
And misuse of the offerings made to the Three Jewels, in devotion and for the dead,
jinsek mechö di yi dak gyur chik
Be purified in the fire of this sang offering!
meché nangsi gangwé dultren ré
Let its flames fill the entire universe and every minute particle of flame
kunzang chöpé trinpung mizepa
Become an inexhaustible cloud of offerings like Samantabhadra’s
gyalwé shyingkham yong la khyab gyur chik
Pervading throughout all the buddha realms!
meché yeshe ö ngé chöjin zer
May these flames, offering-rays of five-coloured lights of wisdom,
rik druk narmé né su khyab gyurpé
Pervade throughout the six classes of beings, down to the Avīcī Hells,
kham sum khorwa jalü ökur drol
The three realms of saṃsāra be liberated into the rainbow body,
dro kün changchub nyingpor sangye shok
And all sentient beings awaken into the heart of enlightenment!
om ah hung
With Oṃ āḥ hūṃ, make the offering a hundred, thousand, or several hundred thousand times.
ku sum dakpa nö kyi shyalyé su
All is purified into the three kāyas: the environment, a heavenly palace where
chö long trul sum nangsi zukpung nam
Dharmakāya, saṃbhogakāya and nirmāṇakāya—appearance and the form aggregates of existence
dütsir shyuwé ja'ö barnang gang
Melt into nectar, flooding the whole expanse of the sky with rainbow light.
khorwa nyangdé zakmé dütsi chü
Saṃsāra is liberated into nirvāṇa; this essence of immaculate nectar,
tokmé dü né danta yenché du
I share with all those who, from beginningless time until now,
nangsi drön du gyurpa yong la ngo
Have been guests in worldly existence.
salam drebü yönten tarchin shying
Having attained all the noble qualities of the stages, paths and fruition,
ta gom chö pé barché kün sal né
And dispelled all obstacles in view, meditation and action,
mejung kunzang tuk kyi khaying su
Within the sky-like space of Samantabhadra’s wondrous wisdom mind,
shyönnu bumkur tensi zinpar shok
May we seize the stronghold of the youthful vase body!
khorwé gyatso chenpo tongpé tar
And when at last the great ocean of saṃsāra is emptied;
womin pema drawar sangye shok
May all beings attain buddhahood in the Lotus Net of Akaniṣṭa!
pung kham sekdzé trakdang ziji bar
The sang offerings of the aggregates and elements blaze in vivid, brilliant splendour!
kar mar changsem sekdzé detong bar
The sang offerings of red and white bodhicitta blaze in bliss and emptiness!
tongnyi nyingjé sekdzé chöying gang
The sang offerings of emptiness and compassion fill the dharmadhātu!
nangsi khordé dorjé ö ngé shyir
Upon the ground of five-coloured vajra light of phenomenal existence, saṃsāra and nirvāṇa,
lhündrub dzok sangye pé sekdzé bul
I offer the sang offering of spontaneously accomplished perfect buddhahood.
ngön gyi lenchak tamché jang gyur chik
May all my karmic debts from the past be purified!
danta gyü la miné tol lo shak
In the present so they do not remain in my mind-stream, I confess them!
ma ong dribpé khorlor magyur chik
In the future, may I never be drawn into the wheel of obscuration!
sotar changsem rigpa dzinpa yi
All impairments of the vows of individual liberation, bodhisattva precepts,
dom ché labpa sang ngak damtsik rik
And samayas of the vidyādharas,
tsor dang matsor nyampa tol lo shak
Conscious or unwitting, I openly admit.
né dön drib dang mitsang dak gyur chik
May illness, harmful influence, obscurations and impurities be purified!
né muk tsön gyi kalpa shyi gyur chik
May this age of plague, famine and warfare be pacified!
tami ü su ongwé sünma dok
May the attacks of invaders be repelled!
chödzé lama dendren barché dok
May the forces that create obstacles by inviting the spiritual teacher to leave this world be
averted!
böyul trami shipé te ngen dok
May inauspicious bad omens for the land of Tibet be averted!
za lu gyalpö sokuk düpa dok
May the planetary forces, nāgas and arrogant king-like spirits, who cut short the breath of
life, be repelled!
jikpa chenpo gyé dang chudruk dok
May the eight great fears and sixteen lesser fears be overcome!
dakchak khor ché trami shipa dok
For me and all those around me, may all that is inauspicious be averted!1
damsi gongpö tutob nüpa dok
May the powers and strength of samaya-breakers and gongpo demons be averted!
As indicated in the ritual for the fire offering, use 108 sang burners and various kinds of
wood.
Through this diamond-like practice of Riwo Sangchö, one will be able to ‘ransom’ death, purify
the misuse of offerings and avert the various kinds of obstacle. In accordance with the
dakini’s instructions, this was set down, without any error, when revealing the hidden land
of Sikkim.
It is said that this arose from the sound of Tertön Namkha Jikmé’s damaru when he was revealing
the hidden land of Sikkim.

| Rigpa Translations, 2022.

Source: “rig 'dzin srog sgrub las ri bo bsang mchod/”. In rin chen gter mdzod chen mo. 111 vols.
Paro: Ngodrup and Sherab Drimay, 1976–1980. (BDRC W20578) Vol 68: 569–572

Version: 1.0-20220103
↑ An alternative version of this line reads: bdag cag gar gnas bkra mi shis pa zlog. (Wherever
I reside, may all that is inauspicious be averted!)