The Concise Cleansing (Sang) Offering
From The Guru’s Heart Practice: Dispeller of All Obstacles (Lamé Tukdrup Barché Kunsel)
revealed by Chokgyur Dechen Lingpa

As for the cleansing offering which arranges ordinary auspicious circumstances and pleases all
deities, the extensive version should be learned from elsewhere. For the concise daily
offering and giving, in a clean place on a raised platform in a fire of assorted nectar-filled
wood place the best part of whatever jewels, grains, medicines, silks, food, and drink
you can acquire.
kyé, kyemé kadak trödral ying
Kyé! The unborn, originally pure basic space free of constructs
gakmé lhündrub ö ngar shar
Manifests as the five-colored lights of unobstructed, spontaneous presence.
tsolmé tukjé gyutrul lé
From the illusory display of effortless compassion,
sishyi chiryang nangwé drön
Beings of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, appearing as anything whatsoever,
chöjin né dir chendren na
As we invite you to this place of offering and giving,
kha la jatsön sharwa shyin
Like a rainbow appearing in the sky,
kechik yükyi shek né kyang
Please come here immediately and
rang rang gyepé den la shyuk
Be seated on whichever seat you please.
sarva samaya dza dza
sarva samaya jaḥ jaḥ

ram yam kham
raṃ yaṃ khaṃ
chö kün gyumar rigpé dang
All phenomena are the illusory radiance of awareness.
yeshe chenpö mé lung chü
The fire, wind, and water of great wakefulness
mi tsang trulpé bakchak kün
Burn, scatter, and wash away all impure, deluded habitual tendencies and
sek tor trü né tongpar jang
Purify them into emptiness.

tongpé ngang lé yum ngé ying
Within the state of emptiness is the basic space of the five consorts,
yongdzok sang gi chötrin lé
In which the perfect cloud of cleansing offerings
lanamepé döyön ter
Becomes a treasure cloud of unsurpassable sense pleasures
namkha dzö kyi trin du gyur
Filling the treasury of space.
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ

rangjung tong sal ö kyi kyilkhor du
In the self-occurring luminous maṇḍala of empty clarity
barwa mé yi dütsi chen gyi shing
Blazes a fire of nectar-filled wood.
döyön khogu sekpé duwa lé
From the smoke of every desirable sense pleasure
lhadzé nyerchö natsok char du beb
Rains down a myriad of divine offerings.

zuk dra dri ro rekja trin shyin tib
Form, sound, smell, taste, and texture are gathered like cloud banks.
tashi dzé tak gyalsi rinchen dün
The auspicious substances and signs, the seven royal possessions,
zatung gö gyen dru men shyönpa sok
Food, drink, clothes, ornaments, grains, medicines, steeds and the like—
si dang shyiwé longchö tayepa
A vast, inexhaustible Samantabhadra offering cloud
mizé kuntuzangpö chötrin ché
Of the infinite enjoyments of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa
namkhé kham kün gyepar gangwa di
Completely fills the whole of space.
changchub bardu kyab su zungwé né
Source of refuge until awakening,
lumé könchok rinchen nam sum sang
Undeceiving, precious Three Jewels—accept this cleansing offering.

jinlab ngödrub trinlé kün gyi dak
Sovereigns of all blessings, siddhis, and activities,
lama yidam khandrö tsok nam sang
Host of gurus, yidams, and ḍākinīs—accept this cleansing offering.

leknyé tangdzin damtsik jechö pé
Those who oversee good and evil in accordance with samaya,
chinang kasung damchen gyatso sang
Ocean of oath-bound outer and inner Dharma protectors—accept this cleansing offering.

ulwé dung sel dögü char chen beb
Yakṣas, wealth gods, and treasure lords
nöjin norlha terdak jewa sang
Who dispel misery and rain down everything desirable—accept this cleansing offering.

pennö tuden dzutrul shuk kyi dro
Hordes of ghosts of the three-thousandfold universe
tongsum sipé jungpö tsok nam sang
Who can benefit or harm and move with miraculous powers—accept this cleansing offering.

khyepar dzamling bö kham kyongwé nyen
In particular, protectors of the land of Tibet in Jambudvīpa,
karchok lha lu shyidak khor ché sang
Virtuous gods, nāgas, local deities, and your retinues—accept this cleansing offering.

jé yi gur lha bang kyi kyé lha dang
Gur deities of kings and birth deities of the people, and
sipa chakpé lha rab tamché sang
World-formation deities—accept this cleansing offering.

böyul shyingkyong tsomo men tsünma
Main land protectors of Tibet, five mentsünma sisters,
ché nga trulpa yang khor chepa sang
Your emanations and retinue—accept this cleansing offering.

loda shyak dü par mé dakpo sok
Lords of the years, months, days, time, of astrological squares and trigrams1—
tsuklak jungwé lha rab tamché sang
All the gods of the elemental sciences—accept this cleansing offering.

lhenchik kyé dang tral du gowé lha
Co-emergent and temporarily-appointed deities,
tünkyen pelwé dralé tsok nam sang
Guardian spirits who increase conducive circumstances—accept this cleansing offering.

nyukmar né dang lobur lhakpa yi
Unfavorable, obstructive karmic creditors,
galkyen gek rik lenchak tamché sang
Innately present or suddenly appearing—I dedicate to you this cleansing offering.

tserab ngön né magyur nyingjé yul
Our mothers from previous lives, objects of compassion,
kham sum si sum rik druk drön kün sang
The guests of the six classes in the three realms and three planes—I give you this cleansing
offering.

dorna chinö dakpa rabjam shying
In short, the outer environment is cleansed as boundless pure lands,
mizé döyön gyen gyi khorlor sang
The adornment wheel of inexhaustible sense pleasures.

nangchü dro kün tsa sum chakgyé lha
The inhabitants, all beings, are cleansed as the mudrā deities of the three roots,
ying dang yeshe yermé chenpor sang
The great indivisibility of basic space and wakefulness.
sang ngo dütsi shing gi düpé sang
Cleansed! Cleansed by the smoke of nectar-filled wood—
nyamdrib mi tsang tamché dak gyur chik
May all unclean stains of samaya violation be purified!

chö do döyön gyatsö trin gyi chö
Offered! I offer clouds of an ocean of sense pleasures—
choktün ngödrub lé shyi trinlé chol
Accomplish the supreme and common siddhis and perform the four activities!
könchok sishyü drön nam pü kyi chö
I offer the choicest part to the Three Jewels, the guests of honor.
jinlab wangkur tukjé zijin kyé
Bestow blessings and empowerment! Make the splendor of compassion shine forth!

gönpo yönten drön nam tukdam kang
May the sacred bonds with the protectors, guests of qualities, be fulfilled.
barché kün sel tünkyen lektsok pel
Dispel all obstacles and make conducive circumstances and excellence increase!
gek rik lenchak drön nam yong la ngo
I fully dedicate to the classes of obstructers, the guests of karmic credit.
nyé shing tsim né pendé samjor drub
Pleased and satisfied, help us accomplish our beneficial plans and actions!
rik druk nyingjé drön künkhyab par jin
I give to the whole six classes, all guests of compassion.
dukngal kündral dé dang denpar shok
May they be free of all suffering and be happy!

tashi kyi ching gewé né diru
In this auspicious, joyful, and virtuous place,
dütsi sang gi chöjin gyipa yi
Through this offering and giving of cleansing amṛta,
khordé chok chü shyingkham rabjam kyi
May all good fortune and excellence of the world and beings
nöchü cha yang lektsok wang du dü
Of saṃsāra, nirvāṇa, and the boundless pure lands of the ten directions be magnetized here.
nyin sum tashi nyimé ö shyin bar
May the three parts of the day blaze with auspiciousness like the shining sun.
tsen sum tashi dawé dang tar sal
May the three parts of the night radiate with auspiciousness like the glowing moon.
nyintsen küntu tashi delek shing
Throughout day and night may everything be auspicious, blissful, and excellent, and
püntsok tendrel getsen lhündrub shok
May an abundance of auspiciousness and virtuous signs instantly appear!

If you perform this daily and in particular to arrange auspicious circumstances when beginning
important Dharma and secular activities, all pollution from samaya violation and unfavorable
factors will be pacified. Conducive circumstances and excellence will effortlessly increase.
Harvests will be plentiful, livestock thrive, and family lines flourish. The Dharma
lineage will remain long and be uplifted. The excellence of the world and beings will be
magnetized, and there will be an abundance of auspiciousness, happiness, and excellence.
Ultimately, by perfecting the accumulation of merit, supreme wisdom will arise effortlessly.
Therefore, this profound instruction should be cherished in common by all.
Samaya! Seal! Seal! Seal! May virtue and excellence increase!

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2019 (trans. Laura Dainty and Oriane Sherap Lhamo). Edited and
adapted for Lotsawa House, 2020.
↑ Astrological squares (spar) and trigrams (sme) correspond to particular designs in the astrological
chart and have their own associated methods of divination in Chinese astrology,
as practiced in Tibet.