Yarlha Shampo Sang Offering
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

kyé, ütsang ru shyi yullha ché
Kye. Great local deity of the four ranges of Ü and Tsang,
sa gyé sempa karchok kyong
Eighth level bodhisattva, guardian of the virtuous,
shyidak yong kyi depön ché
Great chieftain of all the local guardian deities,
chötö drekpé kyilkhor du
Empowered in the maṇḍala of Chötö's haughty spirits,
wang tob dam nö drekpé jé
You took on your commitment as leaders of the arrogant,
shampo yabyum sé khor dang
Shampo deities, male and female, together with your offspring,
kanyen trulpé mak tsok ché
And the hosts of attendants and emanated martial forces,
dir shek sang dang serkyem dang
Come now! Accept these offerings of incense smoke,
korcha natsok chöpa shyé
Golden drink and various other excellent gifts.
nyampa sang la tibpa dang
Clear away degeneration, brighten the gloom,
mitün nöpé kyen kün sung
Guard against all forms of harm and adversity.
tünpé ngödrub dak la tsol
Grant us the attainment of all that is favourable.
chökhor tsuklak wenné kyong
Guard dharma centres, temples, and hermitages,
tenpa tendzin dar shying gyé
Cause the teachings and their holders to prosper and flourish,
jikten dé shying kyipa dang
Bring joy and happiness to the people of this world,
cholwé lé nam drub tu sol
And carry out the activities we entrust to you.
ten la nöpé yi sub tsok
Destroy the deranged who harm the teachings,
talwé dul shyin lokpa dang
Crushing them as if into dust.
gyadré gongpö gyu lam chö
Block the paths of the gyadré and [[gongpo] demons.
tenpé jindak upang to
Elevate the status of the patrons of the teachings.
chok lé namgyal trinlé dzö
And carry out your activity, victorious over all.
ki so cha o lha gyal lo
Ki So Cha'o! Lha gyal lo!
tashi sishyi paljor kün
All auspiciousness, splendour and wealth throughout existence and quiescence—
chuwö gyün shyin duwar dzö
Gather them together like a flowing river.
With this, offer barley flour and butter and a serkyem (golden drink).

Chökyi Lodrö wrote this on the meadow of Tatsa Chumik in front of Yarlha Shampo, in the vicinity
of Chaktsi Drigu, on the twenty-third day of the jyaiṣṭha (fifth) month in the Fire Monkey
year. May virtue abound!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "yar lha sham po'i bsang/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi
blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 11: 487–488